Linxu Kernel:- A kernel is the core software of an operating system that acts as a bridge between the computer's hardware and the applications you run.
Since Linux is Monolithic, it is highly efficient, which is why it dominates the cloud. However, because everything runs in one space, tools like eBPF (which we discussed earlier) were created to let us safely plug into that massive "all-in-one" engine without risking a total system crash.
Responsibility of linux kernel:- The Linux kernel acts as the "middleman" between your software and your hardware. Its primary responsibility is to manage system resources efficiently and securely.
Process  Responsibility, Memory Responsibility, Device Management, File System Management.
System Libraries:- It provides basic functionality son application do not need to communicate directly with the kernel. 
System Utilities:- These are essential program that help in system functioning.
Shell:- Ther shell is  he interface between user and OS.
Linux Distribution (Distor):- Linux kernel + packaged software = Linux Distors.
Linux:- It provide an enviorment where user can run application, manage files, control hardware, and perform system tasks.
Process:- It is running instance of a program. 
Different type of Process:- Foreground, background, Daemon, Zombie, Orphan.
Linux File Permission:- 
chmod: Change the permissions (e.g., chmod +x file makes it executable).
chown: Change the owner or group (e.g., chown root:root file).
umask: Sets the default permissions for newly created files.
Packaage Manager:-  It is a tool to install update, remove manage software in liunx.
Process state in Linux:- Ready, Running, Waiting, Stopped, Zombie.
Zombie  Process:- Process has completed execution still present in the process table.
Orphan Process:- Parent has terminated child is still running.
Linux  handle memory mmanagement:- paging, virtual memory, swapping, cache, memory protection, OOM Killer.
Inodes:- An inodes store metadate about a file.
Cntext Switch:- It happen when the CPU Switch from one procees to another.
LVM:- Logical Volume Manager provides flixible disk management.
Runlevel:- It define machine states.
Socket:- It is an endpoint for communication between two process on ssame machine.

Commands:-
ls	List directory contents
cd	Change directory
pwd	Print working directory
mkdir	Make a directory
rm	Remove files/folders
cp	Copy files
mv	Move or rename
cat	Display file content
tail	View the end of a file
grep	Search for text
vim / nano	Text editors
find	Search for files
diff	Compare two files
chmod	Change permissions	
chown	Change owner/group
sudo	Run as root/admin	
top / htop	Real-time process list	
ps	Snapshot of processes	
kill	Stop a process	
df -h	Disk space usage	
free -m	Memory usage	
curl	Transfer data/API calls	
ssh	Remote login	
netstat / ss	Check open ports	
ip addr	View IP addresses	
ping	Test connectivity	
apt / yum	Install software	
systemctl	Manage services
journalctl	View service logs	
traceroute: Lists every "hop" (router) a packet takes to reach a destination. Example: traceroute google.com
tracepath: Similar to traceroute but doesn't require root privileges and tracks MTU (Maximum Transmission Unit). Example: tracepath 1.1.1.1
netstat: Displays network connections, routing tables, and interface statistics. Example: netstat -tulpn (Shows listening ports and PIDs)
ipconfig / ifconfig: Displays or configures network interface parameters (Note: ip addr is the modern Linux replacement). Example: ip addr show
mtr: A real-time combination of ping and traceroute. Example: mtr google.com
curl: Transfers data to or from a server via supported protocols (HTTP, FTP, etc.). Example: curl -X POST https://api.site.com/data
wget: Non-interactive network downloader for files and entire websites. Example: wget https://wordpress.org/latest.tar.gz
watch: Runs a command repeatedly at a set interval (default 2s) to track changes. Example: watch -n 1 "df -h" (Watch disk space every second)
GREP: Searches for a specific pattern/string within text. Example: grep "ERROR" system.log
SED: Stream Editor used for searching, replacing, or deleting text in a file. Example: sed -i 's/localhost/127.0.0.1/g' app.conf (Find and replace)
AWK: A scripting language for processing data in columns/rows. Example: awk '{print $1, $3}' file.txt (Prints only the 1st and 3rd columns)

Interview Question Answer
. Beginner Level (The Fundamentals)
Q: What is the "Kernel" and what is its role?
A: The Kernel is the core of the OS. It acts as a bridge between hardware and software, managing CPU, memory, and device drivers.
Q: What is the difference between a Hard Link and a Soft Link?
A: A Hard Link is a direct pointer to the file's data (inode); if you delete the original file, the data stays. A Soft Link (Symbolic) is just a shortcut to the file path; if the original is deleted, the link breaks.
Q: How do you change permissions so only the owner can read/write a file?
A: chmod 600 filename.
Q: What does the top command show?
A: It provides a dynamic, real-time view of running processes, CPU usage, and memory consumption.
2. Intermediate Level (System Admin & Troubleshooting)
Q: What are Inodes in Linux?
A: An Inode is a data structure that stores metadata about a file (size, owner, permissions, location on disk), but not the filename or the actual data.
Q: How do you find which process is using a specific port (e.g., 8080)?
A: lsof -i :8080 or netstat -tulnp | grep 8080.
Q: Explain the Linux Boot Process.
A: 1. BIOS/UEFI (Hardware check)
2. GRUB/Bootloader (Loads Kernel)
3. Kernel (Initializes hardware)
4. Systemd/Init (Starts services/processes).
Q: What is a "Zombie Process" and how do you kill it?
A: A process that has finished execution but still has an entry in the process table because the parent hasn't "reaped" it. You cannot kill -9 a zombie; you must kill the parent process or wait for it to be adopted by init.
3. Advanced Level (Architecture & Performance)
Q: What is eBPF and why is it useful?
A: It’s a technology that allows running sandboxed programs in the kernel without changing kernel source code. It’s used for high-performance networking, security, and deep observability.
Q: How does Linux handle "Thrashing"?
A: Thrashing occurs when the system spends more time swapping data between RAM and Disk (Swap) than actually executing code. The solution is usually to add RAM or use the OOM Killer to terminate memory-heavy processes.
Q: Explain the concept of "Load Average" (the 3 numbers in uptime).
A: They represent the average system load over the last 1, 5, and 15 minutes. It counts processes that are either using the CPU or waiting for it (runnable state).
4. Scenario-Based Questions (The "Real World")
Scenario A: The "Invisible" Disk Space
Interviewer: "A developer says their disk is 100% full (df -h). They deleted a 50GB log file, but df -h still says the disk is full. Why?"
Answer: A process still has that file open. Linux doesn't actually free the disk blocks until all file descriptors are closed.
Fix: Run lsof | grep deleted to find the process holding the file, then restart that process or truncate the file.
Scenario B: The "Server is Slow"
Interviewer: "The server is responding slowly. You run top and see low CPU usage but high 'iowait' (%wa). What is the problem?"
Answer: High iowait means the CPU is sitting idle because it’s waiting for the Disk/Storage to respond.
Fix: Use iostat or iotop to find the process doing heavy disk writing/reading, or check if the underlying disk (EBS/SAN) is failing.
Scenario C: Connection Timed Out
Interviewer: "App A cannot talk to App B on Port 5432. How do you troubleshoot?"
Answer:
Check if App B is listening: ss -tulpn | grep 5432.
Check local firewall: iptables -L or ufw status.
Test connectivity from App A: nc -zv <IP> 5432.
Check if a Cloud Security Group or Network ACL is blocking it.
Scenario D: Permission Denied for Root
Interviewer: "You are the root user and you get 'Permission Denied' when trying to modify a file. How is this possible?"
Answer: The file likely has the Immutable Attribute set.
Fix: Run lsattr filename to check. If you see an i, run chattr -i filename to remove the protection.


Port Number 
FTP - 21
SSH - 22
TELNET - 23
SMTP - 25
DNS - 53
HTTP - 80 
HTTPS - 443